docs(tutorial): zabbix (#1361)
scaleway/docs-content: tutorials/zabbix-monitoring/index.mdx

  posted: 2019-06-17
---

> Zabbix is a powerful open-source software that offers real-time monitoring for servers, virtual machines, network devices, and web applications. It collects monitoring metrics such as network utilization, CPU load, and disk space consumption, which are then stored in a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zabbix is a powerful open-source software that offers real-time monitoring for servers, virtual machines, network devices, and web applications. Monitoring metrics such as network utilization, CPU load, and disk space consumption are collected by Zabbix and then stored in a database.
```

> This monitoring tool enables users to determine the health status of their IT infrastructure and analyze data over time. The insights provided by Zabbix can be used to plan upgrades in the infrastructure when requirements grow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This monitoring tool enables users to determine the health status of their IT infrastructure and analyze data over time. The insights provided by Zabbix can be used to plan upgrades to the infrastructure when requirements grow.
```

> In this tutorial, we will be using two Scaleway Production-Optimized [Ubuntu Jammy Jellyfish (22.04 LTS)](https://www.scaleway.com/en/imagehub/) Instances. One Instance will act as a server hosting the Zabbix application, while the other will act as a client being monitored. By following this tutorial, you will learn how to set up Zabbix and take control of your IT infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: I think you could put the link for "production-optimized" instead of the one for the imagehub

> In this tutorial, we will be using two Scaleway Production-Optimized [Ubuntu Jammy Jellyfish (22.04 LTS)](https://www.scaleway.com/en/imagehub/) Instances. One Instance will act as a server hosting the Zabbix application, while the other will act as a client being monitored. By following this tutorial, you will learn how to set up Zabbix and take control of your IT infrastructure.

Author: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will use two Scaleway [Production-Optimized](/compute/instances/reference-content/choosing-instance-type/) Ubuntu Jammy Jellyfish (22.04 LTS) Instances. One Instance will be a server hosting the Zabbix application, while the other will be a client being monitored. Following this tutorial will teach you how to set up Zabbix and take control of your IT infrastructure.
```

<Message type="tip">
  We recommend you follow this tutorial using a [Production-Optimized Instance](/compute/instances/reference-content/choosing-instance-type/).
</Message>

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />
 
<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [configured your SSH Key](/console/my-project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)
  - You have sudo privileges or access to the root user.
  - You have two [Instances](https://www.scaleway.com/en/virtual-instances/) running Ubuntu Jammy Jellyfish (22.O4 LTS)
  - The Instance acting as server should have a [LEMP-Stack](/tutorials/installation-lemp-ubuntu-bionic/) installed
</Message>

## Installing the Zabbix server

<Message type="important">

>   Make sure that a [LEMP-Stack](/tutorials/installation-lemp-ubuntu-bionic/) is installed on theInstance before continuing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Make sure that a [LEMP-Stack](/tutorials/installation-lemp-ubuntu-bionic/) is installed on the Instance before continuing.
```

</Message>

> 1. Start by downloading the repository configuration package. Refer to the [Zabbix website](https.//www.zabbix.com/download) for the latest version of the repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Download the repository configuration package. Refer to the [Zabbix website](https.//www.zabbix.com/download) for the latest version of the repository.
```

> 1. Start by downloading the repository configuration package. Refer to the [Zabbix website](https://www.zabbix.com/download) for the latest version of the repository.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Download the repository configuration package. Refer to the [Zabbix website](https://www.zabbix.com/download) for the latest version of the repository.
```

    ```
    wget https.//repo.zabbix.com/zabbix/6.2/ubuntu/pool/main/z/zabbix-release/zabbix-release_6.2-4%2Bubuntu22.04_all.deb
    ```
    <Message type="tip">

>       The version of Zabbix available within the repositories of Ubuntu is outdated. It is strongly recommended to download the latest version directly from the Zabbix repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The version of Zabbix available across Ubuntu repositories is outdated. We strongly recommended you download the latest version directly from the Zabbix repositories.
```

This tutorial uses a **MariaDB** database with Zabbix.

<Message type="important">
  Make sure to [initalize](/tutorials/mariadb-ubuntu-bionic/#securing-mariadb) your MariaDB server before configuring the database.
</Message>

1. Log into MariaDB with the user **root** and the password set during the installation.
    ```
    mysql -uroot -p
    ```
2. Create the Zabbix database and set the charset to UTF-8.
    ```
    create database zabbix character set utf8mb4 collate utf8mb4_bin;
    ```

> 3. Create a user for the Zabbix server and set their password to secure_zabbix_mariadb_password. Then, grant the user access to the previously created database so they can use it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Create a user for the Zabbix server and set their password to `secure_zabbix_mariadb_password`. Then, grant the user access to the previously created database so they can use it.
```

1. Type the domain name of your Zabbix Instance (e.g. `http://zabbix.example.com:8080`) in a web browser and open the page. The Installation wizard displays. Click **Next step** to launch it.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-62-1.webp" alt="" />
    A check of pre-requirements displays, all off the values must have the status **OK**.
2. Click **Next step** to continue.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-install-02.webp" alt="" />
3. Enter the MariaDB (MySQL) database information. They are already configured for the Zabbix server, but the web interface requires them too. Click **Next step** once the information is filled in the form.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-install-03.webp" alt="" />
4. Click **Next step** to continue. A pre-installation summary displays.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-install-04.webp" alt="" />
5. Check that all given information is correct and click **Next step** to continue.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-install-05.webp" alt="" />
6. Click **Finish** to complete the installation of the Zabbix web interface.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-install-06.webp" alt="" />

## Configuring Zabbix agent

<Message type="important">

>   The following steps must be done on the second Instance which shall be monitored by Zabbix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The following steps must be carried out on the second Instance which will be monitored by Zabbix.
```

    ```
    apt install zabbix-agent
    ```

> 5. Generate a [pre-shared key (PSK)](https://www.zabbix.com/documentation/6.2/manual/encryption/using_pre_shared_keys) to secure the connection between the server and agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Generate a [pre-shared key (PSK)](https://www.zabbix.com/documentation/6.2/manual/encryption/using_pre_shared_keys) to secure the connection between server and agent.
```

    # TLSConnect=unencrypted
    ```

>     Uncomment the Line `# TLSConnect=unencrypted` and modify it as follows. `TLSConnect=psk`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Uncomment the line `# TLSConnect=unencrypted` and modify it as follows. `TLSConnect=psk`.
```

9. Scroll down to the `TLSAccept` block which manages incoming connections.
    ```
    ### Option: TLSAccept
    #       What incoming connections to accept.

>     #       Multiple values can be specified, separated by comma.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    #       Multiple values can be specified, separated by commas.
```

    systemctl restart zabbix-agent.service
    systemctl enable zabbix-agent.service
    ```

> 13. Allow traffic on port 10050, if `ufw` is installed and active on the Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
13. If `ufw` is installed and active on the Instance, allow traffic on port 10050.
```
Better to have the condition before the action, no ?

    ```
    ufw allow 10050/tcp
    ```

## Adding a host to Zabbix

> 1. Open a web browser and navigate to your Zabbix serverInstance (i.e. `http://zabbix.example.com/`). Enter the Username **Admin** and the Password **zabbix**, then click **Sign in**. The Zabbix dashboard displays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open a web browser and navigate to your Zabbix server Instance (i.e. `http://zabbix.example.com/`). Enter the Username **Admin** and Password **zabbix**, then click **Sign in**. The Zabbix dashboard displays.
```
+ Not sure about the uppercases on Username & Password

    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-dashboard.webp" alt="" />

> 2. Click **Configuration**, then **Hosts** once you log in. On the hosts page, click **Create Host** to add the second Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click **Configuration**, then **Hosts**. On the hosts page, click **Create Host** to add the second Instance.
```

    systemctl restart zabbix-agent.service
    systemctl enable zabbix-agent.service
    ```
13. Allow traffic on port 10050, if `ufw` is installed and active on the Instance.
    ```
    ufw allow 10050/tcp
    ```

## Adding a host to Zabbix

1. Open a web browser and navigate to your Zabbix serverInstance (i.e. `http://zabbix.example.com/`). Enter the Username **Admin** and the Password **zabbix**, then click **Sign in**. The Zabbix dashboard displays.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-dashboard.webp" alt="" />

> 2. Click **Configuration**, then **Hosts** once you log in. On the hosts page, click **Create Host** to add the second instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click **Configuration**, then **Hosts** once you log in. On the hosts page, click **Create Host** to add the second Instance.
```

    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-create-host.webp" alt="" />

> 3. Enter the **Host name** of the secondInstance and its **IP address**. Optionally one or several groups can be chosen to bundle Instances in groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Enter the **Host name** of the second Instance and its **IP address**. Optionally one or several groups can be chosen to bundle Instances in groups.
```

4. Click **Templates** to choose a configuration template for the instance. Select `Templates/Operating systems` -> `Linux by Zabbix agent` and click **Select**.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-add-server-01.webp" alt="" />

> 5. Click the **Encryption** tab and set PSK for both **Connections to host** and **Connections from host**. Set **PSK identity** to the value of the `TLSPSKIdentity` configured in the Zabbix Agent configuration (i.e. **ZabbixPSK-01**) and set the PSK value to the key generated during the configuration of the Agent. Once set, click **Add** at the bottom of the page to add theInstance to Zabbix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Click the **Encryption** tab and set PSK for both **Connections to host** and **Connections from host**. Set **PSK identity** to the value of the `TLSPSKIdentity` configured in the Zabbix Agent configuration (i.e. **ZabbixPSK-01**) and set the PSK value to the key generated during the configuration of the Agent. Once set, click **Add** at the bottom of the page to add the Instance to Zabbix.
```

3. Fill in the details of the new user. Required information are.
    - **Alias** - The login of the user.
    - **Name** - The first name of the user.
    - **Surname** - The family name of the user.
    - **Groups** - The groups to which the user belongs. Choose **Zabbix Administrators** to create a new admin user.
    - **Password** and **Password confirmation**.

    All other values are already pre-set in working condition.

    Once all information is set, click **Add** to create the user.

## Configuring email notifications

Zabbix proposes a wide range of [notification plugins](https.//www.zabbix.com/integrations?cat=notifications_alerting) including emails, jabber, SMS and many more to get alerted in case of an issue.

1. To configure email notifications, click **Administration**, then on **Media types** in the navigation bar on the top of the page. A list of all pre-configured notification options displays.
    <Lightbox src="scaleway-zabbix-media-types.webp" alt="" />
2. Click **Email** to edit the settings. Enter the SMTP credentials of your email provider and update the configuration by clicking on **Update**.
    <Message type="note">

>       To send email from instance, make sure to [unblock](https.//www.scaleway.com/en/faq/why-can-i-not-send-any-email/) the SMTP ports in the Instances security group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      To send email from the Instance, make sure to [unblock](/compute/instances/how-to/send-emails-from-your-instance/) the SMTP ports in the Instances security group.
```
